# Universal Evolution: Minerals as Evolving Networks

Having reinterpreted biological fitness through the *Evolution by
Emergence* paradigm, we now explicitly test Principle 1 (Universality of
Emergence) by examining evolution in a non-living system. This chapter
uses the mineral kingdom as a case study, demonstrating how the
paradigm’s core concepts—dynamic networks (Principle 2), feedback loops
(Principle 3), interdependence (Principle 4), abstract selection
(Principle 5), and constrained agency (Principle 6)—apply beyond
biology, driving complexity in the abiotic world.

## Common Threads in Evolving Systems

As proposed by the paradigm and supporting research , many evolving
systems, whether living or not, share common characteristics. They arise
from components with vast combinatorial possibilities (Principle 8).
They are subject to processes generating diverse configurations within a
dynamic network (Principle 2). Crucially, selection mechanisms favor
configurations exhibiting functions like stability or persistence
(Principle 5, abstractly applied). Key traits include:

- **Combinatorial Richness:** Systems are composed of diverse components
  (e.g., elements) that can combine in vast numbers of ways.

- **Configuration Generation:** Processes (e.g., geological changes)
  exist that explore and produce numerous different configurations
  (e.g., potential mineral formulas).

- **Selection for Function:** Mechanisms preferentially select
  configurations based on advantageous functions (e.g., thermodynamic
  stability leading to persistence).

This interplay between variation generation and selection, driven by
feedback within the network (Principle 3), can drive systems toward
increased complexity or patterning over time, irrespective of whether
they are alive.

## Case Study: The Evolving Mineral Kingdom

Earth’s mineral kingdom offers a compelling, quantifiable case study
supporting the paradigm’s claim of universality (Principle 1) . Over
billions of years, the diversity and complexity of minerals have
systematically increased. This wasn’t random; it was driven by Earth’s
changing physical and chemical conditions—an evolving geochemical
network (Principle 2)—creating new environments and possibilities via
feedback (Principle 3). The minerals that formed and persisted were
effectively "selected" for their stability (an abstract form of
competition/collaboration, Principle 5) within these conditions.
Researchers quantify this using metrics like Functional Information
(FI), tracking the rarity of stable configurations within the expanding
possibility space. Studies show mineral FI monotonically increased
throughout Earth’s history , demonstrating directional evolution.
Interestingly, this abiotic evolution appears "bounded"—approaching a
limit defined by geochemical constraints (Principle 6: Constrained
Agency)—potentially contrasting with biological evolution’s open-ended
nature . This highlights how the paradigm accommodates different
evolutionary trajectories (Principle 7, Principle 10).

## Universal Principles and the Emergence Paradigm

This example of mineral evolution strongly supports the principle of
*Universality* (Principle 1) within the "Evolution by Emergence"
paradigm. It demonstrates that the core mechanisms—emergence from
interactions within dynamic networks (Principle 2), feedback loops
driving change (Principle 3), interdependence within the geochemical
context (Principle 4), abstract selection pressures (Principle 5), and
constrained agency limiting possibilities (Principle 6)—are not confined
to life. These principles appear fundamental to how complexity arises
and transforms across diverse natural systems, requiring holistic,
non-reductionist analysis (Principle 9) informed by complexity science
(Principle 8).

## Conclusion

Recognizing evolution in non-living systems like minerals, as framed by
the Evolution by Emergence paradigm, significantly broadens our
understanding of complexity and change in the universe (Principle 1,
Principle 10). It reinforces the central theme of this book: that
underlying principles of network dynamics and emergence shape the
complex, interconnected systems we observe, from the geological to the
biological and beyond. This universal perspective, demonstrated here
with minerals, helps us appreciate the continuity of creative,
evolutionary processes across different substrates and domains, governed
by the paradigm’s core principles.
